[[Career]]
#interview/job

# Company

## Hard Facts
- FY 12/31
- Deloitte EA, Grant Thornton previous EAq
- $7.8bn revenue as of 12/31/2021
- Net income of $3.6bn

## Products

Coinbase offers products for both retail and institutional cryptocurrency investors, as well as other related cryptocurrency products.

The company's products for retail traders include:

- Coinbase, an app used to buy, store and trade different cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash, Ethereum, Ethereum Classic and Litecoin.
- Coinbase Pro, a professional asset trading platform for trading digital assets.
- Coinbase Wallet, an app that allows customers to access decentralized crypto apps (dapps) using a dapp browser.
- Coinbase NFT, a marketplace where NFT collectors can buy and sell their pieces to one another.

Products for institutional traders include:

- Coinbase Prime, a trading platform for institutional customers.
- Coinbase Custody, specialist level services for institutions that hold bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies with Coinbase. 

Other cryptocurrency-related products include:
- USD Coin, a digital stablecoin that lets customers put up U.S. dollars in exchange for a cryptocurrency that has the same value but can be traded more quickly.
- Coinbase Card, a debit Visa card that allows customers to spend cryptocurrency.
- Coinbase Commerce, a payment service for merchants.
- Coinbase Earn, a cryptocurrency learning platform that rewards users with small amounts of altcoins for watching videos and taking quizzes to learn about them. 

The company develops an application programming interface (API) for developers and merchants to build applications and accept payments in digital currencies.

Coinbase has a mobile app for both iOS and Android.


# About me

- talk about my experience prior to Deloitte
	- Little company of my friend, was able to utilize 
	- Bank Austria: supported a lead banker with 

## Job Description

**What You’ll Be Doing (ie. Job Duties)**

-   Build and mature a program to support SOX initiatives, including developing a SOX plan and driving initiatives within
-   Build, manage, and coach a small team of security compliance analysts to execute against the SOX roadmap
-   Assist with scoping of IT systems and deliver training to owners in preparation for SOX audit
-   Lead gap assessments over IT control environment and design and track remediation efforts to completion
-   Assess SOX implications of new products, update relevant controls, and communicate requirements to product organization and other stakeholders
-   Perform impact analysis for control deficiencies identified over SOX environment and partner with owning teams to design remediation plan
-   Oversee audit evidence collection process via an automated tool
-   Provide ongoing reporting to stakeholders and leadership on above responsibilities
-   Build close relationships with stakeholder teams including Security, IT, Infrastructure, Engineering, Data, and Finance to advise on SOX requirements and ensure excellence in control ownership
-   Create and improve SOX procedural documentation, including control narratives, data flow diagrams, and process documentation
-   Work closely with internal and external auditors to educate them about a complex technology control environment
-   Oversee quality of audit initiatives, identify and analyze process gaps, provide guidance and expertise to team members
-   Develop creative solutions to prove risk mitigation and solve for complex audit problems faced by the crypto industry
-   Serve as a point of escalation for your team, identify opportunities to address systemic challenges, and equip your team to drive issue resolution

**What We Look For In You (ie. Job Requirements)**

-   Minimum of 7+ years of security/IT compliance or equivalent experience with experience leading and/or building a team of Full Time employees
-   Strong knowledge and hands-on experience in Internal Controls over Financial Reporting, SOX 404 frameworks, and testing to support compliance
-   Prior experience working closely with auditors and/or external regulators
-   Experience leading compliance initiatives from start to finish
-   Experience reporting security compliance posture to senior stakeholders
-   Proven understanding and audit experience of cloud technologies, AWS preferred
-   Ability to effectively and autonomously accomplish outcomes across cross-functional teams in ambiguous situations with minimal supervision
-   Strong oral and written communication skills
-   Ability to multitask, direct cross functional work, and hold others accountable to committed deadlines in a fast paced environment
-   Ability to communicate with technical / non-technical stakeholders to align on shared outcomes

  

**Nice to haves**

  -   BA or BS in a technical field or equivalent experience
-   Prior experience at a big 4 accounting firm
-   Security certifications e.g. CISA, CISSP, CISM or other relevant certifications
-   Experience auditing in Crypto space

## Crypto Lingo

- Address: An alphanumeric reference to where crypto assets can be sent or stored.

- Bitcoin: The first system of global, decentralized, scarce, digital money as initially introduced in a white paper titled Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System by Satoshi Nakamoto.

- Block: Synonymous with digital pages in a ledger. Blocks are added to an existing blockchain as transactions occur on the network. Miners are rewarded for “mining” a new block.

- Blockchain: A cryptographically secure digital ledger that maintains a record of all transactions that occur on the network and follows a consensus protocol for confirming new blocks to be added to the blockchain.

- Cold storage: The storage of private keys in any fashion that is disconnected from the internet. Common cold storage examples include offline computers, USB drives, or paper records.

- Crypto: A broad term for any cryptography-based market, system, application, or decentralized network.

- Crypto asset or token: Any digital asset built using blockchain technology, including cryptocurrencies, stablecoins, and security tokens.

- Crypto Asset Volatility: Represents our internal measure of crypto volatility in the market relative to prior periods. The volatility of crypto assets is measured on an hourly basis (using 10 minute price intervals within each hour) for each crypto asset supported for trading on Coinbase, averaged over the applicable time period (quarterly), then weighted by each crypto asset’s share of total trading volume during the same time period across a select set of trading platforms, in addition to the Coinbase platform, that operate in similar markets including itBit, Bitfinex, Bitstamp, bitFlyer, Binance.US, Binance, Kraken, Gemini, Bittrex, and Poloniex.

- Cryptocurrency: Bitcoin and alternative coins, or “altcoins,” launched after the success of Bitcoin. This category of crypto asset is designed to work as a medium of exchange, store of value, or to power applications and excludes security tokens.

- Cryptoeconomy: A new open financial system built upon crypto.

- Customer: A retail user, institution, or ecosystem partner on our platform.

- DeFi: Short for Decentralized Finance. Peer-to-peer software-based network of protocols that can be used to facilitate traditional financial services like borrowing, lending, trading derivatives, insurance, and more through smart contracts.

- Ecosystem partners: Developers, creators, merchants, asset issuers, organizations and financial institutions, and other groups building decentralized protocols, applications, products, or other services for the cryptoeconomy.

- Ethereum: A decentralized global computing platform that supports smart contract transactions and peer-to-peer applications, or “Ether,” the native crypto assets on the Ethereum network.

- Fork: A fundamental change to the software underlying a blockchain which results in two different blockchains, the original, and the new version. In some instances, the fork results in the creation of a new token.

- Hot wallet: A wallet that is connected to the internet, enabling it to broadcast transactions.

- Institutions: Businesses that include hedge funds, small to large financial institutions, and corporations.

- Miner: Individuals or entities who operate a computer or group of computers that add new transactions to blocks, and verify blocks created by other miners. Miners collect transaction fees and are rewarded with new tokens for their services.

- Mining: The process by which new blocks are created, and thus new transactions are added to the blockchain.

- Network: The collection of all miners that use computing power to maintain the ledger and add new blocks to the blockchain. Most networks are decentralized, reducing the risk of a single point of failure.

- Non-fungible token or NFT: A crypto asset that is unique - as opposed to “fungible” assets like Bitcoin and dollar bills.

- Protocol: A type of algorithm or software that governs how a blockchain operates.

- Public key or private key: Each public address has a corresponding public key and private key that are cryptographically generated. A private key allows the recipient to access any funds belonging to the address, similar to a bank account password. A public key helps validate transactions that are broadcasted to and from the address. Addresses are shortened versions of public keys, which are derived from private keys.

- Retail users: Individual users with an account on our platform.

- Security token: A crypto asset that is a security under the U.S. federal securities laws. This includes digital forms of traditional equity or fixed income securities, or may be assets deemed to be a security based on their characterization as an investment contract or note.

- Smart contract: Software that digitally facilitates or enforces a rules-based agreement or terms between transacting parties.

- Stablecoin: Crypto assets designed to minimize price volatility. A stablecoin is designed to track the price of an underlying asset such as fiat money or an exchange-traded commodity (such as precious metals or industrial metals), while other stablecoins utilize algorithms that are designed to maintain a relative stable price of the asset. Stablecoins can be backed by fiat money, physical commodities or other crypto assets.

- Staking: An energy efficient equivalent of mining. Stakers use pools of tokens as collateral to validate transactions and create blocks. In exchange for this service, stakers earn a reward.

- Supported crypto assets: The crypto assets we support for trading and custody on our platform, which included 139 crypto assets for trading and 172 crypto assets under custody as of December 31, 2021.

- USD Coin or USDC: A stablecoin issued by Circle that is backed by dollar denominated assets held by the issuer in segregated accounts with U.S. regulated financial institutions. Coinbase and Circle co-founded the Centre Consortium which supports and administers the governance of USDC.

- Wallet: A place to store public and private keys for crypto assets. Wallets are typically software, hardware, or paper-based.

- Wallet user: A retail user who has established an account with a username on our non-custodial software-based product. Coinbase Wallet is an application that allows the user to connect to DeFi applications and self-custody crypto assets. While they operate separately from our main platform, wallet users are included in the following key business metrics: Verified Users and Monthly Transacting Users, or MTUs.

- Web3: A broad category of technologies that are defined by their use of internet protocols built on top of open source, decentralized and distributed systems. Examples of Web3 technologies include blockchain networks, cryptocurrencies, NFTs, and smart contracts.



Arielle - 4 years, the time does all security compliance
also do assurance side

2nd life of defense 

product launches

security practices


first year testing
