---
tags:
  - books
author:
  - "[[Sönke Ahrens]]"
read: 2023-03-05
topics:
  - "[[Books]]"
---
# Synopsis

The key to good and efficient writing lies in the intelligent organisation of ideas and notes. This book helps students, academics and nonfiction writers to get more done, write intelligent texts and learn for the long run. It teaches you how to take smart notes and ensure they bring you and your projects forward. The Take Smart Notes principle is based on established psychological insight and draws from a tried and tested note-taking-technique. This is the first comprehensive guide and description of this system in English, and not only does it explain how it works, but also why. It suits students and academics in the social sciences and humanities, nonfiction writers and others who are in the business of reading, thinking and writing. Instead of wasting your time searching for notes, quotes or references, you can focus on what really counts: thinking, understanding and developing new ideas in writing. It does not matter if you prefer taking notes with pen and paper or on a computer, be it Windows, Mac or Linux. And you can start right away.

# Reference/Review
A good book that helps contextualizing the art of proper note taking - a note is a developed thought and should be treated that way, but there are different type of notes, one of which - permanent notes, should be kept in your slip-box for ever. Out of these notes, more notes and ideas will develop. 

# Developed Ideas
- [[A holistic approach to develop ideas is to start bottom up from within the system]]
- [[The act of writing everything down is the deliberate practice of becoming better at what we are doing]]
- [[Journaling is the deliberate act of mind-cleansing]]
- [[By dumping tasks into an external system and out of your mind, you can focus on more important aspects of work]]
- [[Standardization relieves us from the burden of choice]]

# Concepts

- [[Mind Like Water]]
- [[Getting Things Done]]
- [[Zeigarnik Effect]]


# Highlights

-   Every intellectual endeavour starts with a note. (Page 1)
-   This book aims to fill this gap by showing you how to efficiently turn your thoughts and discoveries into convincing written pieces and build up a treasure of smart and interconnected notes along the way. (Page 2)
-   The quality of a paper and the ease with which it is written depends more than anything on what you have done in writing before you even made a decision on the topic. (Page 3)
-   Every task that is interesting, meaningful and well-defined will be done, because there is no conflict between long- and shortterm interests. Having a meaningful and well-defined task beats willpower every time. Not having willpower, but not having to use willpower indicates that you set yourself up for success. (Page 5)
-   A good structure is something you can trust. It relieves you from the burden of remembering and keeping track of everything. (Page 5)
-   The principle of GTD is to collect everything that needs to be taken care of in one place and process it in a standardised way. This doesn't necessarily mean that we actually do everything we once intended to do, but it forces us to make clear choices and regularly check if our tasks still fit into the bigger picture. Only if we know that everything is taken care of, from the important to the trivial, can we let go and focus on what is right in front of us. Only if nothing else is lingering in our working memory and taking up valuable mental resources can we experience what Allen calls a "[[Mind Like Water]]" - the state where we can focus on the work right in front of us without getting distracted by competing thoughts. (Page 10)
-   Studies on highly successful people have proven again and again that success is not the result of strong willpower and the ability to overcome resistance, but rather the result of smart working environments that avoid resistance in the first place. (Page 16)
-   Strictly speaking, Luhmann had two slip-boxes: a bibliographical one, which contained the references and brief notes on the content of the literature, and the main one in which he collected and generated his ideas, mainly in response to what he read. The notes were written on index cards and stored in wooden boxes.  
    Whenever he read something, he would write the bibliographic information on one side of a card and make brief notes about the content on the other side. These notes would end up in the bibliographic slip-box.  
    In a second step, shortly after, he would look at his brief notes and think about their relevance for his own thinking and writing. He then would turn to the main slip-box and write his ideas, comments and thoughts on new pieces of paper, using only one for each idea and restricting himself to one side of the paper, to make it easier to read them later without having to take them out of the box. He kept them usually brief enough to make one idea fit on a single sheet, but would sometimes add another note to extend a thought.  
    He usually wrote his notes with an eye towards already existing notes in the slip-box. And while the notes on the literature were brief, he wrote them with great care, not much different from his style in the final manuscript: in full sentences and with explicit references to the literature from which he drew his material. More often than not, a new note would directly follow up on another note and would become part of a longer chain of notes. He then would add references to notes somewhere else in the slip-box, some of them which were located nearby, others in completely different areas and contexts. Some were directly related and read more like comments, others contained not-soobvious connections. Rarely would a note stay in isolation.  
    He did not just copy ideas or quotes from the texts he read, but made a transition from one context to another. It was very much like a translation where you use different words that fit a different context, but strive to keep the original meaning as truthfully as possible. Writing that an author struggles in one chapter to justify his method can be a much more adequate description of this chapter's content than any quote from the text itself (this would call for an explanation, of course).  
    The trick is that he did not organise his notes by topic, but in the rather abstract way of giving them fixed numbers. The numbers bore no meaning and were only there to identify each note permanently. If a new note was relevant or directly referred to an already existing note, such as a comment, correction or addition, he added it directly behind the previous note. If the existing note had the number 22, the new note would become note number 23. If 23 already existed, he named the new note 22a. By alternating numbers and letters, with some slashes and commas in between, he was able to branch out into as many strings of thought as he liked. For example, a note about causality and systems theory carried the number 21/3d7a7 following a note with the number 21/3d7a6.  
    Whenever he added a note, he checked his slip-box for other relevant notes to make possible connections between them.  
    Adding a note directly behind another note is only one way of doing this. Another way is by adding a link on this and/or the other note, which could be anywhere in the system. This much resembles, of course, the way we use hyperlinks on the internet. But, as I will explain later, they are quite different and it would be rather misleading to think of his slip-box as a personal Wikipedia or a database on paper. The similarities are obviously there, but the subtle differences are what makes this very system unique.  
    By adding these links between notes, Luhmann was able to add the same note to different contexts. While other systems start with a preconceived order of topics, Luhmann developed topics bottom up, then added another note to his slip-box, on which he would sort a topic by sorting the links of the relevant other notes.  
    The last element in his file system was an index, from which he would refer to one or two notes that would serve as a kind of entry point into a line of thought or topic. Notes with a sorted collection of links are, of course, good entry points. (Page 18)
-   Make fleeting notes. Always have something at hand to write with to capture every idea that pops into your mind. (Page 23)
-   Make literature notes. Whenever you read something, make notes about the content. Write down what you don't want to forget or think you might use in your own thinking or writing.  
    Keep it very short, be extremely selective, and use your own words. Be extra selective with quotes - don't copy them to skip the step of really understanding what they mean. Keep these notes together with the bibliographic details in one place - your reference system. (Page 24)
    -   Note: literature notes
-   Make permanent notes. Now turn to your slip-box. Go through the notes you made in step one or two (ideally once a day and before you forget what you meant) and think about how they relate to what is relevant for your own research, thinking or interests. This can soon be done by looking into the slip-box - it only contains what interests you anyway. The idea is not to collect, but to develop ideas, arguments and discussions. Does the new information contradict, correct, support or add to what you already have (in the slip-box or on your mind)?  
    Can you combine ideas to generate something new? What questions are triggered by them?  
    Write exactly one note for each idea and write as if you were writing for someone else: Use full sentences, disclose your sources, make references and try to be as precise, clear and brief as possible. Throw away the fleeting notes from step one and put the literature notes from step two into your reference system. You can forget about them now. All that matters is going into the slip-box. (Page 24)
    -   Note: permanent notes
-   4.  Now add your new permanent notes to the slip-box by:  
        a) Filing each one behind one or more related notes (with a program, you can put one note "behind" multiple notes; if you use pen and paper like Luhmann, you like Luhmann, you have to decide where it fits best and add manual links to the other notes). Look to which note the new one directly relates or, if it does not relate directly to any other note yet, just file it behind the last one.  
        b) Adding links to related notes.  
        c) Making sure you will be able to find this note later by either linking to it from your index or by making a link to it on a note that you use as an entry point to a discussion or topic and is itself linked to the index. (Page 24)
    
    -   Note: adding permanent notes to slip-box
-   Develop your topics, questions and research projects bottom up from within the system. See what is there, what is missing and what questions arise. Read more to challenge and strengthen your arguments and change and develop your arguments according to the new information you are learning about. Take more notes, develop ideas further and see where things will take you. Just follow your interest and always take the path that promises the most insight. Build upon what you have. Even if you don't have anything in your slip-box yet, you never start from scratch - you already have ideas on your mind to be tested, opinions to be challenged and questions to be answered. Do not brainstorm for a topic. Look into the slip-box instead to see where chains of notes have developed and ideas have been built up to clusters. Don't cling to an idea if another, more promising one gains momentum. The more you become interested in something, the more you will read and think about it, the more notes you will collect and the more likely it is that you will generate questions from it. It might be exactly what you were interested in from the beginning, but it is more likely that your interests will have changed - that is what insight does. (Page 25)
    -   Note: holistic approach for ideas
-   If writing is the medium of research and studying nothing else than research, then there is no reason not to work as if nothing else counts than writing. (Page 37)
    -   Note: writing is the only thing that matters
-   And by doing everything with the clear purpose of writing about it, you will do what you do deliberately. Deliberate practice is the only serious way of becoming better at what we are doing. (Page 38)
    -   Note: writing is the only thing that matters
-   The biggest advantage compared to a top-down storage system organised by topics is that the slip-box becomes more and more valuable the grows, instead of getting messy and confusing. (…) The slip-box is designed to present you with ideas you have already forgotten, allowing your brain to focus on thinking instead of remembering. (Page 41)
    -   Note: advantage of a slip-box
-   The only permanently stored notes are the literature notes in the reference system and the main notes in the slip-box. (Page 44)
-   Every intellectual endeavour starts from an already existing preconception, which then can be transformed during further inquires and can serve as a starting point for following endeavours. Basically, that is what Hans-Georg Gadamer called the hermeneutic circle. (Page 48)
-   By focusing on what is interesting and keeping written track of your own intellectual development, topics, questions and arguments will emerge from the material without force. (Page 48)
-   If we look into our slip-box to see where clusters have built up, we not only see possible topics, but topics we have already worked on - even if we were not able to see it up front. The idea that nobody ever starts from scratch suddenly becomes very concrete. If we take it seriously and work accordingly, we literally never have to start from scratch again. (Page 49)
-   The things you are supposed to find in your head by brainstorming usually don't have their origins in there. Rather, they come from the outside: through reading, having discussions and listening to others, through all the things that could have been accompanied and often even would have been improved by writing. (Page 49)
-   The same applies to the crucial ability to distinguish the important bits of a text from the less important ones: the better we become at it, the more effective our reading will become, the more we can read, the more we will learn. We will enter a beautiful, virtuous circle of competency. You cannot help but feel motivated by it.  
    The same goes for writing permanent notes, which have another feedback loop built-in: Expressing our own thoughts in writing makes us realise if we really thought them through (Page 54)
-   To be able to become an expert, we need the freedom to make our own decisions and all the necessary mistakes that help us learn. Like bicycling, it can only be learned by doing it. Most study guides and academic writing teachers are trying very hard to spare you from that experience by telling you what, when and how to write instead. But they are keeping you from learning the very thing academia and writing is all about: gaining insight and making it public. (Page 65)
    -   Note: become an expert instead if a planner
-   Zeigarnik successfully reproduced what is now known as the Zeigarnik effect: Open tasks tend to occupy our short-term memory - until they are done. That is why we get so easily distracted by thoughts of unfinished tasks, regardless of their importance. But thanks to Zeigarnik's follow-up research, we also know that we don't actually have to finish tasks to convince our brains to stop thinking about them. All we have to do is to write them down in a way that convinces us that it will be taken care of. That's right: The brain doesn't distinguish between an actual finished task and one that is postponed by taking a note. By writing something down, we literally get it out of our heads.  
    This is why David Allen's "Getting things done" system works:  
    The secret to have a "[mind like water](app://obsidian.md/mind%20like%20water)" is to get all the little stuff out of our short-term memory. And as we can't take care of everything once and for all right now, the only way to do that is to have a reliable external system in place where we can keep all our nagging thoughts about the many things that need to be done and trust that they will not be lost.  
    And the same is true for the work with the slip-box. To be able to focus on the task at hand, we have to make sure other, unfinished tasks are not lingering in our head and wasting precious mental resources. (Page 70)
-   In the way we organise our research and writing, we too can significantly reduce the amount of decisions we have to make.  
    While content-related decisions have to be made (on what is more and what is less important in an article, on the connections between notes, the structure of a text, etc.), most organisational decisions can be made up front, once and for all, by deciding on one system. By always using the same notebook for making quick notes, always extracting the main ideas from a text in the same way and always turning them into the same kind of permanent notes, which are always dealt with in the same manner, the number of decisions during a work session can be greatly reduced. That leaves us with much more mental energy that we can direct towards more useful tasks, like trying to solve the problems in question. (Page 73)
-   To get a good paper written, you only have to rewrite a good draft; to get a good draft written, you only have to turn a series of notes into a continuous text. And as a series of notes is just the rearrangement of notes you already have in your slip-box, all you really have to do is have a pen in your hand when you read.  
    If you understand what you read and translate it into the different context of your own thinking, materialised in the slipbox, you cannot help but transform the findings and thoughts of others into something that is new and your own. It works both ways: The series of notes in the slip-box develops into arguments, which are shaped by the theories, ideas and mental models you have in your head. And the theories, ideas and mental models in your head are also shaped by the things you read. (Page 74)
-   The step from the slip-box to the final text is pretty straightforward. The content is already meaningful, thought through and in many parts already put into well-connected sequences.  
    The notes only need to be put into a linear order. While the notes themselves are formulated so that they can be understood on their own, they are at the same time embedded in one or more contexts that enrich their meaning. Drawing from the slipbox to develop a draft is more like a dialogue with it than a mechanical act. Therefore, the outcome is never a copy of previous work, but always comes with surprises. There will always be something you couldn't have anticipated (Page 75)
-   The slip-box forces us to be selective in reading and notetaking, but the only criterion is the question of whether something adds to a discussion in the slip-box. The only thing that matters is that it connects or is open to connections. Everything can contribute to the development of thoughts within the slip-box: an addition as well as a contradiction, the questioning of a seemingly obvious idea as well as the differentiation of an argument.  
    What we are looking for are facts and information that can add something and therefore enrich the slip-box. One of the most important habitual changes when starting to work with the slipbox is moving the attention from the individual project with our preconceived ideas towards the open connections within the slip-box. (Page 81)
-   Working with the slip-box, therefore, doesn't mean storing information in there instead of in your head, i.e. not learning. On the contrary, it facilitates real, long-term learning. It just means not cramming isolated facts into your brain - something you probably wouldn't want to do anyway. The objection that it takes too much time to take notes and sort them into the slipbox is therefore short-sighted. Writing, taking notes and thinking about how ideas connect is exactly the kind of elaboration that is needed to learn. Not learning from what we read because we don't take the time to elaborate on it is the real waste of time. (Page 90)



