---
author:
  - "[[Friedrich Engels]]"
cover: https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/51jbKUT4QiL.jpg)
genre: 
length: 
isbn: 
isbn13: 
year: 
rating: 10
topics:
  - "[[Books]]"
created: 2023-10-31
last: 2023-02-24
via: ""
tags:
  - books
  - movies
  - to-read
---


# Synopsis

An introduction to [[Socialism]] that was easier to read than [[The Capital]] by [[Karl Marx]]. Divided into three chapters, the first chapter talks about how utopian ideas of creating a more egalitarian society have emerged over the last centuries, but were (1) crushed by the bourgeoisie or (2) by the lack of scientific basis which lead to mish-mashing opinions, economic theories, etc.

The second chapter talks about the importance of [[Dialectics]] as a method of explaining how the world and society changes over millennia, centuries and decades. History is not a product of chance, but a process. History is class-struggle and the natural outcome of it is [[Socialism]]. Socialism’s foundation is scientific.

The third chapter talks about historical materialism, the inherent conflict / antagonism between labor and capital. 

# Reflection/Review


# Developed Ideas

- [[History of mankind is a process and all steps within are interconnected]]
- [[All past history was the history of class struggle]]
- [[Socialism is the necessary outcome of the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie]]
- [[Socialism is a science]]
- [[Surplus-value is the inherent modus operandi of the capitalist system]]
- [[The modes of production are the basis of all social structure]]
	- [[All social changes are to be sought in changes in the modes of production and exchange]]
- [[Existing conditions of the mode of productions enable us to find errors and discrepancies]]
- [[Conflict between proletariat and bourgeoise is man-made]]


# Book Highlights


- This new German philosophy culminated in the Hegelian system. In this system — and herein is its great merit — for the first time the whole world, natural, historical, intellectual, is represented as a process — i.e., as in constant motion, change, transformation, development; and the attempt is made to trace out the internal connection that makes a continuous whole of all this movement and development. From this point of view, the history of mankind no longer appeared as a wild whirl of senseless deeds of violence, all equally condemnable at the judgment seat of mature philosophic reason and which are best forgotten as quickly as possible, but as the process of evolution of man himself. It was now the task of the intellect to follow the gradual march of this process through all its devious ways, and to trace out the inner law running through all its apparently accidental phenomena. ([Location 748](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=748))
    - Note: Precursor to historical materialism - antagonism between capital and labor.
- The Hegelian system, in itself, was a colossal miscarriage — but it was also the last of its kind. It was suffering, in fact, from an internal and incurable contradiction. Upon the one hand, its essential proposition was the conception that human history is a process of evolution, which, by its very nature, cannot find its intellectual final term in the discovery of any so-called absolute truth. But, on the other hand, it laid claim to being the very essence of this absolute truth. A system of natural and historical knowledge, embracing everything, and final for all time, is a contradiction to the fundamental law of dialectic reasoning. ([Location 762](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=762))
- The new facts made imperative a new examination of all past history. Then it was seen that all past history, with the exception of its primitive stages, was the history of class struggles; that these warring classes of society are always the products of the modes of production and of exchange in a word, of the economic conditions of their time; that the economic structure of society always furnishes the real basis, starting from which we can alone work out the ultimate explanation of the whole superstructure of juridical and political institutions as well as of the religious, philosophical, and other ideas of a given historical period. Hegel has freed history from metaphysics he made it dialectic; but his conception of history was essentially idealistic. But now idealism was driven from its last refuge, the philosophy of history; now a materialistic treatment of history was propounded, and a method found of explaining man’s “knowing” by his “being”, instead of, as heretofore, his “being” by his “knowing”. ([Location 790](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=790))
    - Note: This is the basis of Marxist thought - all history was the history of class struggles.
- From that time forward, Socialism was no longer an accidental discovery of this or that ingenious brain, but the necessary outcome of the struggle between two historically developed classes — the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Its task was no longer to manufacture a system of society as perfect as possible, but to examine the historic-economic succession of events from which these classes and their antagonism had of necessity sprung, and to discover in the economic conditions thus created the means of ending the conflict. ([Location 798](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=798))
    - Note: Socialism as the logical outcome of the class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie.
- These two great discoveries, the materialistic conception of history and the revelation of the secret of capitalistic production through surplus-value, we owe to Marx. With these discoveries, Socialism became a science. ([Location 812](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=812))
    - Note: Socialism is a science - historical materialism and surplus value as the basis for this science.
- The materialist conception of history starts from the proposition that the production of the means to support human life and, next to production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis of all social structure; that in every society that has appeared in history, the manner in which wealth is distributed and society divided into classes or orders is dependent upon what is produced, how it is produced, and how the products are exchanged. ([Location 825](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=825))
    - Note: The modes of production is the basis of all social structure
- From this point of view, the final causes of all social changes and political revolutions are to be sought, not in men’s brains, not in men’s better insights into eternal truth and justice, but in changes in the modes of production and exchange. ([Location 828](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=828))
    - Note: The purpose of social changes
- From this it also follows that the means of getting rid of the incongruities that have been brought to light must also be present, in a more or less developed condition, within the changed modes of production themselves. These means are not to be invented by deduction from fundamental principles, but are to be discovered in the stubborn facts of the existing system of production. ([Location 834](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=834))
    - Note: This talks about how existing conditions of the mode of productions enable us to find errors, discrepancies, etc.
- And this conflict between productive forces and modes of production is not a conflict engendered in the mind of man, like that between original sin and divine justice. It exists, in fact, objectively, outside us, independently of the will and actions even of the men that have brought it on. Modern Socialism is nothing but the reflex, in thought, of this conflict in fact; its ideal reflection in the minds, first, of the class directly suffering under it, the working class. ([Location 847](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=847))
    - Note: Conflict between proletariat and bourgeousie is man made - it exists objectively, it is not part of a sinister plan to create a conflict out of thin air. It exists independently of the will and actions.

- In the fourth section of Capital, Marx has explained in detail how since the 15th century this has been historically worked out through the three phases of simple co-operation, manufacture, and modern industry. But the bourgeoisie, as is shown there, could not transform these puny means of production into mighty productive forces without transforming them, at the same time, from means of production of the individual into social means of production only workable by a collectivity of men. The spinning wheel, the handloom, the blacksmith’s hammer, were replaced by the spinning-machine, the power-loom, the steamhammer; the individual workshop, by the factory implying the co-operation of hundreds and thousands of workmen. In like manner, production itself changed from a series of individual into a series of social acts, and the production from individual to social products. The yarn, the cloth, the metal articles that now come out of the factory were the joint product of many workers, through whose hands they had successively to pass before they were ready. No one person could say of them: “I made that; this is my product.” ([Location 857](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=857))
    - Note: The alienation of the worker from the product he is producing - the means of production of the individual into social means of production only workable by the collectivity of men.
- Now, the owner of the instruments of labor always appropriated to himself the product, although it was no longer his product but exclusively the product of the labor of others. Thus, the products now produced socially were not appropriated by those who had actually set in motion the means of production and actually produced the commodities, but by the capitalists. The means of production, and production itself, had become in essence socialized. But they were subjected to a form of appropriation which presupposes the private production of individuals, under which, therefore, every one owns his own product and brings it to market. The mode of production is subjected to this form of appropriation, although it abolishes the conditions upon which the latter rests. [2] ([Location 889](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=889))
- Wage-labor, aforetime the exception and accessory, now became the rule and basis of all production; aforetime complementary, it now became the sole remaining function of the worker. The wage-worker for a time became a wageworker for life. The number of these permanent was further enormously increased by the breaking-up of the feudal system that occurred at the same time, by the disbanding of the retainers of the feudal lords, the eviction of the peasants from their homesteads, etc. The separation was made complete between the means of production concentrated in the hands of the capitalists, on the one side, and the producers, possessing nothing but their labor-power, on the other. The contradiction between socialized production and capitalistic appropriation manifested itself as the antagonism of proletariat and bourgeoisie. ([Location 904](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=904))
- Thus it comes about, to quote Marx, that machinery becomes the most powerful weapon in the war of capital against the working-class; that the instruments of labor constantly tear the means of subsistence out of the hands of the laborer; that they very product of the worker is turned into an instrument for his subjugation. ([Location 961](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=961))
- We have seen that the ever-increasing perfectibility of modern machinery is, by the anarchy of social production, turned into a compulsory law that forces the individual industrial capitalist always to improve his machinery, always to increase its productive force. The bare possibility of extending the field of production is transformed for him into a similarly compulsory law. The enormous expansive force of modern industry, compared with which that of gases is mere child’s play, appears to us now as a necessity for expansion, both qualitative and quantitate, that laughs at all resistance. Such resistance is offered by consumption, by sales, by the markets for the products of modern industry. But the capacity for extension, extensive and intensive, of the markets is primarily governed by quite different laws that work much less energetically. The extension of the markets cannot keep pace with the extension of production. ([Location 977](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=977))
- The collision becomes inevitable, and as this cannot produce any real solution so long as it does not break in pieces the capitalist mode of production, the collisions become periodic. Capitalist production has begotten another “vicious circle”. ([Location 983](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=983))
- In these crises, the contradiction between socialized production and capitalist appropriation ends in a violent explosion. The circulation of commodities is, for the time being, stopped. Money, the means of circulation, becomes a hindrance to circulation. All the laws of production and circulation of commodities are turned upside down. The economic collision has reached its apogee. The mode of production is in rebellion against the mode of exchange. ([Location 996](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=996))
- The fact that the socialized organization of production within the factory has developed so far that it has become incompatible with the anarchy of production in society, which exists side by side with and dominates it, is brought home to the capitalist themselves by the violent concentration of capital that occurs during crises, through the ruin of many large, and a still greater number of small, capitalists. ([Location 999](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=999))
- For in capitalistic society, the means of production can only function when they have undergone a preliminary transformation into capital, into the means of exploiting human labor-power. The necessity of this transformation into capital of the means of production and subsistence stands like a ghost between these and the workers. It alone prevents the coming together of the material and personal levers of production; it alone forbids the means of production to function, the workers to work and live. On the one hand, therefore, the capitalistic mode of production stands convicted of its own incapacity to further direct these productive forces. On the other, these productive forces themselves, with increasing energy, press forward to the removal of the existing contradiction, to the abolition of their quality as capital, to the practical recognition of their character as social production forces. ([Location 1006](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=1006))
- Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more completely transforms the great majority of the population into proletarians, it creates the power which, under penalty of its own destruction, is forced to accomplish this revolution. Whilst it forces on more and more of the transformation of the vast means of production, already socialized, into State property, it shows itself the way to accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat seizes political power and turns the means of production into State property. ([Location 1066](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=1066))

- But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes all class distinction  and  class  antagonisms,  abolishes also the State as State. Society, thus far, based upon class antagonisms, had need of the State. That is, of an organization of the particular class which was, pro tempore, the exploiting class, an organization for the purpose of preventing any interference from without with the existing conditions of production, and, therefore, especially, for the purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited classes in the condition of oppression corresponding with the given mode of production (slavery, serfdom, wage-labor). The State was the official representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together into a visible embodiment. But, it was this only in so far as it was the State of that class which itself represented, for the time being, society as a whole: in ancient times, the State of slaveowning citizens; in the Middle Ages, the feudal lords; in our own times, the bourgeoisie. ([Location 1070](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=1070))
- When, at last, it becomes the real representative of the whole of society, it renders itself unnecessary. As soon as there is no longer any social class to be held in subjection; as soon as class rule, and the individual struggle for existence based upon our present anarchy in production, with the collisions and excesses arising from these, are removed, nothing more remains to be repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no longer necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really constitutes itself the representative of the whole of society — the taking possession of the means of production in the name of society — this is, at the same time, its last independent act as a State. State interference in social relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies out of itself; the government of persons is replaced by the administration  of things, and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is not “abolished”. It dies out. This gives the measure of the value of the phrase: “a free State”, both as to its justifiable use at times by agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific inefficiency; and also of the demands of the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the State out of hand. ([Location 1077](https://readwise.io/to_kindle?action=open&asin=B096F8CBGT&location=1077))

